# 001 Book For Application Developers

**Scope of this manual**

The User's Guide for Application Developers is the first manual the reader should consult when learning about Geant4 or developing a Geant4 -based detector simulation program. This manual is designed to:

-   introduce the first-time user to the Geant4 object-oriented detector simulation toolkit,

-   provide a description of the available tools and how to use them, and

-   supply the practical information required to develop and run simulation applications which may be used in real experiments.

This manual is intended to be an overview of the toolkit, rather than an exhaustive treatment of it. Related physics discussions are not included unless required for the description of a particular tool. Detailed discussions of the physics included in Geant4 can be found in the Physics Reference Manual. Details of the design and functionality of the Geant4 classes can be found in the User's Guide for Toolkit Developers.

Geant4 is a detector simulation toolkit written in the C++ language. The reader is assumed to have a basic knowledge of object-oriented programming using C++. Although Geant4 is a fairly complicated software system, only a relatively small part of it needs to be understood in order to begin developing detector simulation applications. Bindings to the Python and Julia programming languages are also available from community projects. An understanding of radiation physics and associated processes is beneficial.

[Contents]

-   Introduction
-   Getting Started with Geant4 - Running a Simple Example
-   Toolkit Fundamentals
-   Detector Definition and Response
-   Tracking and Physics
-   User Actions
-   Control
-   Visualization
-   Analysis
-   Language Bindings
-   Examples
-   Appendix
-   Bibliography

**Status of this Document**

Guide for Application Developers using the Geant4 toolkit.

>
>
> -   Rev 1.0: First Sphinx version implemented for Geant4 Release 10.4, 8th Dec 2017
>
> -   Rev 2.0: Updates and fixes in documentatio for Geant4 Release 10.4, 15th May 2018
>
> -   Rev 3.0: Geant4 Release 10.5, 11th December 2018
>
> -   Rev 3.1: Geant4 Updates and fixes - especially to search functionality, 5th March 2019
>
> -   Rev 4.0: Geant4 Release 10.6, 6th December 2019
>
> -   Rev 5.0: Geant4 Release 10.7, 4th December 2020
>
> -   Rev 6.0: Geant4 Release 11.0, 10th December 2021
>
> -   Rev 7.0: Geant4 Release 11.1, 9th December 2022
>
> -   Rev 7.1: Geant4 Fixes to http links, 15th July 2023
>
> -   Rev 8.0: Geant4 Release 11.2, 8th December 2023
>
> -   Rev 9.0: Geant4 Release 11.3, 6th December 2024
>
> -   Rev 9.1: Geant4 Added html UI links, 18th December 2024
>
> -   Rev 9.2: Geant4 Fixed geomtry and scintillation descriptions, 14th June 2025
>
> -   Rev 11.4: Geant4 Release 11.4, 5th December 2024 and revised revision numbers to be in-phase with release
>
>
