# 007 How to Specify Physics Processes

## Physics Processes

Physics processes describe how particles interact with materials. Geant4 provides seven major categories of processes:

-   electromagnetic,

-   hadronic,

-   transportation,

-   decay,

-   optical,

-   photolepton_hadron, and

-   parameterisation.

All physics processes are derived from the `G4VProcess` base class. Its virtual methods

-   `AtRestDoIt`,

-   `AlongStepDoIt`, and

-   `PostStepDoIt`

and the corresponding methods

-   `AtRestGetPhysicalInteractionLength`,

-   `AlongStepGetPhysicalInteractionLength`, and

-   `PostStepGetPhysicalInteractionLength`

describe the behavior of a physics process when they are implemented in a derived class. The details of these methods are described in Physics Processes.

The following are specialized base classes to be used for simple processes:

`G4VAtRestProcess`

:   Processes with only `AtRestDoIt`

`G4VContinuousProcess`

:   Processes with only `AlongStepDoIt`

`G4VDiscreteProcess`

:   processes with only `PostStepDoIt`

Another 4 virtual classes, such as `G4VContinuousDiscreteProcess`, are provided for complex processes.

## Managing Processes

The `G4ProcessManager` class contains a list of processes that a particle can undertake. It has information on the order of invocation of the processes, as well as which kind of `DoIt` method is valid for each process in the list. A `G4ProcessManager` object corresponds to each particle and is attached to the `G4ParticleDefiniton` class.

In order to validate processes, they should be registered with the particle's `G4ProcessManager`. Process ordering information is included by using the `AddProcess()` and `SetProcessOrdering()` methods. For registration of simple processes, the `AddAtRestProcess()`, `AddContinuousProcess()` and `AddDiscreteProcess()` methods may be used.

`G4ProcessManager` is able to turn some processes on or off during a run by using the `ActivateProcess()` and `InActivateProcess()` methods. These methods are valid only after process registration is complete, so they must not be used in the *PreInit* phase.

The `G4VUserPhysicsList` class creates and attaches `G4ProcessManager` objects to all particle classes defined in the `ConstructParticle()` method.

## Specifying Physics Processes

`G4VUserPhysicsList` is the base class for a \"mandatory user class\" (see How to Define the main() Program), in which all physics processes and all particles required in a simulation must be registered. The user must create a class derived from `G4VUserPhysicsList` and implement the pure virtual method `ConstructProcess()`.

For example, if just the `G4Geantino` particle class is required, only the transportation process need be registered. The `ConstructProcess()` method would then be implemented as follows:

```cpp
void MyPhysicsList::ConstructProcess()
{
  // Define transportation process
  AddTransportation();
}
```

Here, the `AddTransportation()` method is provided in the `G4VUserPhysicsList` class to register the `G4Transportation` class with all particle classes. The `G4Transportation` class (and/or related classes) describes the particle motion in space and time. It is the mandatory process for tracking particles.

In the `ConstructProcess()` method, physics processes should be created and registered with each particle's instance of `G4ProcessManager`.

An example of process registration is given in the `G4VUserPhysicsList`::`AddTransportation()` method.

Registration in `G4ProcessManager` is a complex procedure for other processes and particles because the relations between processes are crucial for some processes. In order to ease registration procedures, G4PhysicsListHelper is provided. Users do not care about type of processes (i.e. AtRest and/or Discrete and/or Continuous ) or ordering parameters.

An example of electromagnetic process registration for the gamma is shown below

```cpp
void MyPhysicsList::ConstructProcess()
{
  // Define transportation process
  AddTransportation();
  // electromagnetic processes
  ConstructEM();
}

void MyPhysicsList::ConstructEM()
{
  // Get pointer to G4PhysicsListHelper
  G4PhysicsListHelper* ph = G4PhysicsListHelper::GetPhysicsListHelper();

  //  Get pointer to gamma
  G4ParticleDefinition* particle = G4Gamma::GammaDefinition();

  // Construct and register processes for gamma
  ph->RegisterProcess(new G4PhotoElectricEffect(), particle);
  ph->RegisterProcess(new G4ComptonScattering(), particle);
  ph->RegisterProcess(new G4GammaConversion(), particle);
  ph->RegisterProcess(new G4RayleighScattering(), particle);
}
```
