# 008 How to Generate a Primary Event

## Generating Primary Events

`G4VuserPrimaryGeneratorAction` is one of the mandatory classes available for deriving your own concrete class. In your concrete class, you have to specify how a primary event should be generated. Actual generation of primary particles will be done by concrete classes of `G4VPrimaryGenerator`, explained in the following sub-section. Your `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` concrete class just arranges the way primary particles are generated.

```cpp
//////////////////////////////////
// PrimaryGeneratorAction.hh
//////////////////////////////////

#ifndef PrimaryGeneratorAction_h
#define PrimaryGeneratorAction_h 1

#include "G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction.hh"
#include "G4ThreeVector.hh"
#include "globals.hh"

class G4ParticleGun;
class G4Event;

class PrimaryGeneratorAction : public G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction
{
  public:
    PrimaryGeneratorAction(
      const G4String& particleName = "geantino",
      G4double energy = 1.*MeV,
      G4ThreeVector position= G4ThreeVector(0,0,0),
      G4ThreeVector momentumDirection = G4ThreeVector(0,0,1));
    ~PrimaryGeneratorAction();

    // methods
    virtual void GeneratePrimaries(G4Event*);

  private:
    // data members
    G4ParticleGun*  fParticleGun; //pointer a to G4 service class
};

#endif

//////////////////////////////////
// PrimaryGeneratorAction.cc
//////////////////////////////////

#include "PrimaryGeneratorAction.hh"

#include "G4Event.hh"
#include "G4ParticleGun.hh"
#include "G4ParticleTable.hh"
#include "G4ParticleDefinition.hh"

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

PrimaryGeneratorAction::PrimaryGeneratorAction(
                                const G4String& particleName,
                                G4double energy,
                                G4ThreeVector position,
                                G4ThreeVector momentumDirection)
  : G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction(),
    fParticleGun(0)
{
  G4int nofParticles = 1;
  fParticleGun  = new G4ParticleGun(nofParticles);

  // default particle kinematic
  G4ParticleTable* particleTable = G4ParticleTable::GetParticleTable();
  G4ParticleDefinition* particle
    = particleTable->FindParticle(particleName);
  fParticleGun->SetParticleDefinition(particle);
  fParticleGun->SetParticleEnergy(energy);
  fParticleGun->SetParticlePosition(position);
  fParticleGun->SetParticleMomentumDirection(momentumDirection);
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

PrimaryGeneratorAction::~PrimaryGeneratorAction()
{
  delete fParticleGun;
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

void PrimaryGeneratorAction::GeneratePrimaries(G4Event* anEvent)
{
  // this function is called at the beginning of event

  fParticleGun->GeneratePrimaryVertex(anEvent);
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......
```

### Selection of the generator

In the constructor of your `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction`, you should instantiate the primary generator(s). If necessary, you need to set some initial conditions for the generator(s).

In PrimaryGeneratorAction, `G4ParticleGun` is constructed to use as the actual primary particle generator. Methods of `G4ParticleGun` are described in the following section. Please note that the primary generator object(s) you construct in your `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` concrete class must be deleted in your destructor.

### Generation of an event

`G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` has a pure virtual method named `generatePrimaries()`. This method is invoked at the beginning of each event. In this method, you have to invoke the `G4VPrimaryGenerator` concrete class you instantiated via the `generatePrimaryVertex()` method.

You can invoke more than one generator and/or invoke one generator more than once. Mixing up several generators can produce a more complicated primary event.

## G4VPrimaryGenerator

Geant4 provides three `G4VPrimaryGenerator` concrete classes. Among these `G4ParticleGun` and `G4GeneralParticleSource` will be discussed here. The third one is `G4HEPEvtInterface`, which will be discussed in Event Generator Interface.

### G4ParticleGun

`G4ParticleGun` is a generator provided by Geant4. This class generates primary particle(s) with a given momentum and position. It does not provide any sort of randomizing. The constructor of `G4ParticleGun` takes an integer which causes the generation of one or more primaries of exactly same kinematics. It is a rather frequent user requirement to generate a primary with randomized energy, momentum, and/or position. Such randomization can be achieved by invoking various set methods provided by `G4ParticleGun`. The invocation of these methods should be implemented in the `generatePrimaries()` method of your concrete `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` class before invoking `generatePrimaryVertex()` of `G4ParticleGun`. Geant4 provides various random number generation methods with various distributions (see Global Usage Classes).

### Public methods of `G4ParticleGun`

The following methods are provided by `G4ParticleGun`, and all of them can be invoked from the `generatePrimaries()` method in your concrete `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` class.

-   `void SetParticleDefinition(G4ParticleDefinition*)`

-   `void SetParticleMomentum(G4ParticleMomentum)`

-   `void SetParticleMomentumDirection(G4ThreeVector)`

-   `void SetParticleEnergy(G4double)`

-   `void SetParticleTime(G4double)`

-   `void SetParticlePosition(G4ThreeVector)`

-   `void SetParticlePolarization(G4ThreeVector)`

-   `void SetNumberOfParticles(G4int)`

### G4GeneralParticleSource

For many applications `G4ParticleGun` is a suitable particle generator. However if you want to generate primary particles in more sophisticated manner, you can utilize `G4GeneralParticleSource`, the Geant4 General Particle Source module (GPS), discussed in the next section ( General Particle Source).
