# 018 Event

## Representation of an event

`G4Event` represents an event. An object of this class contains all inputs and outputs of the simulated event. This class object is constructed in `G4RunManager` and sent to `G4EventManager`. The event currently being processed can be obtained via the `getCurrentEvent()` method of `G4RunManager`.

## Structure of an event

A `G4Event` object has four major types of information. Get methods for this information are available in `G4Event`.

Primary vertexes and primary particles

:   Details are given in Event Generator Interface.

Trajectories

:   Trajectories are stored in G4TrajectoryContainer class objects and the pointer to this container is stored in `G4Event`. The contents of a trajectory are given in Trajectory and Trajectory Point.

Hits collections

:   Collections of hits generated by *sensitive detectors* are kept in `G4HCofThisEvent` class object and the pointer to this container class object is stored in `G4Event`. See Hits for the details.

Digits collections

:   Collections of digits generated by *digitizer modules* are kept in `G4DCofThisEvent` class object and the pointer to this container class object is stored in `G4Event`. See Digitization for the details.

## Mandates of `G4EventManager`

`G4EventManager` is the manager class to take care of one event. It is responsible for:

-   converting `G4PrimaryVertex` and `G4PrimaryParticle` objects associated with the current `G4Event` object to `G4Track` objects. All of `G4Track` objects representing the primary particles are sent to `G4StackManager`.

-   Pop one `G4Track` object from `G4StackManager` and send it to `G4TrackingManager`. The current `G4Track` object is deleted by `G4EventManager` after the track is simulated by `G4TrackingManager`, if the track is marked as \"killed\".

-   In case the primary track is \"suspended\" or \"postponed to next event\" by `G4TrackingManager`, it is sent back to the `G4StackManager`. Secondary `G4Track` objects returned by `G4TrackingManager` are also sent to `G4StackManager`.

-   When `G4StackManager` returns `NULL` for the \"pop\" request, `G4EventManager` terminates the current processing event.

-   invokes the user-defined methods `beginOfEventAction()` and `endOfEventAction()` from the `G4UserEventAction` class. See User Information Classes for details.

## Stacking mechanism

`G4StackManager` has three stacks, named *urgent*, *waiting* and *postpone-to-next-event*, which are objects of the `G4TrackStack` class. By default, all `G4Track` objects are stored in the *urgent* stack and handled in a \"last in first out\" manner. In this case, the other two stacks are not used. However, tracks may be routed to the other two stacks by the user-defined `G4UserStackingAction` concrete class.

If the methods of `G4UserStackingAction` have been overridden by the user, the *postpone-to-next-event* and *waiting* stacks may contain tracks. At the beginning of an event, `G4StackManager` checks to see if any tracks left over from the previous event are stored in the *postpone-to-next-event stack*. If so, it attempts to move them to the *urgent* stack. But first the `PrepareNewEvent()` method of `G4UserStackingAction` is called. Here tracks may be re-classified by the user and sent to the *urgent* or *waiting* stacks, or deferred again to the *postpone-to-next-event* stack. As the event is processed `G4StackManager` pops tracks from the *urgent* stack until it is empty. At this point the `NewStage()` method of `G4UserStackingAction` is called. In this method tracks from the *waiting* stack may be sent to the *urgent* stack, retained in the *waiting* stack or postponed to the next event.

Details of the user-defined methods of `G4UserStackingAction` and how they affect track stack management are given in User Information Classes.
