# 019 Event Generator Interface

## Structure of a primary event

### Primary vertex and primary particle

The `G4Event` class object should have a set of primary particles when it is sent to `G4EventManager` via `processOneEvent()` method. It is the mandate of your `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` concrete class to send primary particles to the `G4Event` object.

The `G4PrimaryParticle` class represents a primary particle with which Geant4 starts simulating an event. This class object has information on particle type and its three momenta. The positional and time information of primary particle(s) are stored in the `G4PrimaryVertex` class object and, thus, this class object can have one or more `G4PrimaryParticle` class objects which share the same vertex. Primary vertexes and primary particles are associated with the `G4Event` object by a form of linked list.

A concrete class of `G4VPrimaryGenerator`, the `G4PrimaryParticle` object is constructed with either a pointer to `G4ParticleDefinition` or an integer number which represents P.D.G. particle code. For the case of some artificial particles, e.g., geantino, optical photon, etc., or exotic nuclear fragments, which the P.D.G. particle code does not cover, the `G4PrimaryParticle` should be constructed by `G4ParticleDefinition` pointer. On the other hand, elementary particles with very short life time, e.g., weak bosons, or quarks/gluons, can be instantiated as `G4PrimaryParticle` objects using the P.D.G. particle code. It should be noted that, even though primary particles with such a very short life time are defined, Geant4 will simulate only the particles which are defined as `G4ParticleDefinition` class objects. Other primary particles will be simply ignored by `G4EventManager`. But it may still be useful to construct such \"intermediate\" particles for recording the origin of the primary event.

### Forced decay channel

The `G4PrimaryParticle` class object can have a list of its daughter particles. If the parent particle is an \"intermediate\" particle, which Geant4 does not have a corresponding `G4ParticleDefinition`, this parent particle is ignored and daughters are assumed to start from the vertex with which their parent is associated. For example, a Z boson is associated with a vertex and it has positive and negative muons as its daughters, these muons will start from that vertex.

There are some kinds of particles which should fly some reasonable distances and, thus, should be simulated by Geant4, but you still want to follow the decay channel generated by an event generator. A typical case of these particles is B meson. Even for the case of a primary particle which has a corresponding `G4ParticleDefinition`, it can have daughter primary particles. Geant4 will trace the parent particle until it comes to decay, obeying multiple scattering, ionization loss, rotation with the magnetic field, etc. according to its particle type. When the parent comes to decay, instead of randomly choosing its decay channel, it follows the \"pre-assigned\" decay channel. To conserve the energy and the momentum of the parent, daughters will be Lorentz transformed according to their parent's frame.

## Interface to a primary generator

### G4HEPEvtInterface

Unfortunately, almost all event generators presently in use, commonly are written in FORTRAN. For Geant4, it was decided to not link with any FORTRAN program or library, even though the C++ language syntax itself allows such a link. Linking to a FORTRAN package might be convenient in some cases, but we will lose many advantages of object-oriented features of C++, such as robustness. Instead, Geant4 provides an ASCII file interface for such event generators.

`G4HEPEvtInterface` is one of `G4VPrimaryGenerator` concrete class and thus it can be used in your `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` concrete class. `G4HEPEvtInterface` reads an ASCII file produced by an event generator and reproduces `G4PrimaryParticle` objects associated with a `G4PrimaryVertex` object. It reproduces a full production chain of the event generator, starting with primary quarks, etc. In other words, `G4HEPEvtInterface` converts information stored in the `/HEPEVT/` common block to an object-oriented data structure. Because the `/HEPEVT/` common block is commonly used by almost all event generators written in FORTRAN, `G4HEPEvtInterface` can interface to almost all event generators currently used in the HEP community. The constructor of `G4HEPEvtInterface` takes the file name. Listing 28 shows an example how to use `G4HEPEvtInterface`. Note that an event generator is not assumed to give a place of the primary particles, the interaction point must be set before invoking `GeneratePrimaryVertex()` method.

```cpp
#ifndef ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction_h
#define ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction_h 1

#include "G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction.hh"
#include "globals.hh"

class G4VPrimaryGenerator;
class G4Event;

class ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction : public G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction
{
  public:
    ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction();
    ~ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction();

  public:
    void GeneratePrimaries(G4Event* anEvent);

  private:
    G4VPrimaryGenerator* HEPEvt;
};

#endif

#include "ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction.hh"

#include "G4Event.hh"
#include "G4HEPEvtInterface.hh"

ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction::ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction()
{
  HEPEvt = new G4HEPEvtInterface("pythia_event.data");
}

ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction::~ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction()
{
  delete HEPEvt;
}

void ExN04PrimaryGeneratorAction::GeneratePrimaries(G4Event* anEvent)
{
  HEPEvt->SetParticlePosition(G4ThreeVector(0.*cm,0.*cm,0.*cm));
  HEPEvt->GeneratePrimaryVertex(anEvent);
}
```

### Format of the ASCII file

An ASCII file, which will be fed by `G4HEPEvtInterface` should have the following format.

-   The first line of each primary event should be an integer which represents the number of the following lines of primary particles.

-   Each line in an event corresponds to a particle in the `/HEPEVT/` common. Each line has `ISTHEP, IDHEP, JDAHEP(1), JDAHEP(2), PHEP(1), PHEP(2), PHEP(3), PHEP(5).` Refer to the `/HEPEVT/` manual for the meanings of these variables.

Listing 29 shows an example FORTRAN code to generate an ASCII file.

```text
***********************************************************
      SUBROUTINE HEP2G4
*
* Convert /HEPEVT/ event structure to an ASCII file
* to be fed by G4HEPEvtInterface
*
***********************************************************
      PARAMETER (NMXHEP=2000)
      COMMON/HEPEVT/NEVHEP,NHEP,ISTHEP(NMXHEP),IDHEP(NMXHEP),
     >JMOHEP(2,NMXHEP),JDAHEP(2,NMXHEP),PHEP(5,NMXHEP),VHEP(4,NMXHEP)
      DOUBLE PRECISION PHEP,VHEP
*
      WRITE(6,*) NHEP
      DO IHEP=1,NHEP
       WRITE(6,10)
     >  ISTHEP(IHEP),IDHEP(IHEP),JDAHEP(1,IHEP),JDAHEP(2,IHEP),
     >  PHEP(1,IHEP),PHEP(2,IHEP),PHEP(3,IHEP),PHEP(5,IHEP)
10     FORMAT(4I10,4(1X,D15.8))
      ENDDO
*
      RETURN
      END
```

### Future interface to the new generation generators

Several activities have already been started for developing object-oriented event generators. Such new generators can be easily linked and used with a Geant4 based simulation. Furthermore, we need not distinguish a primary generator from the physics processes used in Geant4. Future generators can be a kind of physics process plugged-in by inheriting `G4VProcess`.

## Event overlap using multiple generators

Your `G4VUserPrimaryGeneratorAction` concrete class can have more than one `G4VPrimaryGenerator` concrete class. Each `G4VPrimaryGenerator` concrete class can be accessed more than once per event. Using these class objects, one event can have more than one primary event.

One possible use is the following. Within an event, a `G4HEPEvtInterface` class object instantiated with a minimum bias event file is accessed 20 times and another `G4HEPEvtInterface` class object instantiated with a signal event file is accessed once. Thus, this event represents a typical signal event of LHC overlapping 20 minimum bias events. It should be noted that a simulation of event overlapping can be done by merging hits and/or digits associated with several events, and these events can be simulated independently. Digitization over multiple events will be mentioned in Digitization.
