# 028 The Geometry Modeller and Optimisation

The Geant4 Geometry modeller includes one part which enables the user to describe their setup or detector, and the Navigator which uses this information. The 'describer' part stores the information about all the volumes in the setup, while the Navigator is the class which locates a point, computes the distance to the next volume boundary, and estimates the isotropic safety (the distance to the nearest boundary in any direction).

In a typical simulation step there is a call to find the distance to the next boundary. So the computation cost of this method is important in the overall CPU time of all simulations.

## Pre-processing to reduce the time taken by Navigation

In complex setups there can be tens, hundreds or sometimes thousands or more physical volume inside one mother volume. The Geant4 Geometry Modeller (the Navigator) computes information of each of those volumes, and stores it in a 'optimisation' data structure, in order to reduce the number of candidate volumes intersected for each simulation step.

The method use is similar to methods used for ray tracing in graphics and visualisation, but customised for HEP applications and other domains in which a large number of volumes can co-exist at the same level. The same structure can be duplicated in several parts of the geometry hierarchy tree. But there can also be multiple different logical volumes which contain a large number of daughter volumes.

The optimisation operation in Geant4 is called 'voxelisation', as the information is used to create 'smart voxels': virtual slices or divisions of along one or more axes. First each volume is asked its extent along a particular axis. Then the mother volume is 'sliced' along this axis into a number of virtual divisions (slices), each of which contains a set of integer that identify the daughter volumes it contains. Neighbouring slices which contain the same sets are then merged into an 'extended slice'.

Then a similar division is done along a second (and possibly the remaining third axis) in those extended slice that contain at least a threshold number of daughter volumes (currently 2, 3 and 4 for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd axis respectively). When considering the daughter volumes which are contained inside the extended slices, the boundary of the extended slice are passed to Geant4 solid, and can be used to calculate a fully-optimised extent on the subsequent axis/ axes. All possible orders of the cartesian axes are tried, keeping the one which scored best in our metric.

This method is further described in the note which proposed it: Pure tracking and Geometry in GEANT 4 CERN-RD44 (Geant4) development note, 1995.

The calculations and creation of the 'smart voxels' are done during the initialisation of the geometry. For complex setups the computations can require substantial time, and the resulting data structures can be large. To obtain a report of the volumes which required the most time and memory, you need to set the verbose level of a run:

```cpp
/run/verbose 2
```

The output of this looks as follows:

```cpp
G4GeometryManager::ReportVoxelStats -- Voxel Statistics

   Total memory consumed for geometry optimisation:  975520 kByte
   Total CPU time elapsed for geometry optimisation: 59.2 seconds

   Voxelisation: top CPU users:
   Percent   Total CPU    System CPU     Memory  Volume
   -------   ----------   ----------    -------  ----------
      7.25         4.29         0.00      56584k VolumeNum02
      5.77         3.41         0.00      54619k VolumeNum20
      5.13         3.04         0.00      47491k VolumeNum04
      5.02         2.97         0.00      47165k VolumeNum03
      4.84         2.87         0.00      44924k VolumeNum09
      4.44         2.63         0.00      44599k VolumeNum18
      4.36         2.58         0.00      44474k VolumeNum19
      0.90         0.53         0.00      17809k VolumeNum01

   Voxelisation: top memory users:
   Percent   Memory    Heads    Nodes   Pointers  Total CPU   Volume
   -------   ------   ------   ------   --------  ---------   ----------
      5.80   56584k   153350   727309    1498811       4.29   VolumeNum02
      5.60   54618k   146544   704707    1444035       3.41   VolumeNum20
      4.87   47491k    81390   688903    1212961       3.04   VolumeNum04
      4.83   47165k    80893   684272    1203466       2.97   VolumeNum03
      4.64   45273k    76920   656525    1163615       2.83   VolumeNum05
      4.63   45172k    76750   655021    1161179       2.82   VolumeNum06
```

You can then use this information to decide whether to revise the voxel density parameter 'smartlessness', to reduce memory or CPU time, or seeking to improve navigation performance in a particular volume.

For information on this please look in the section Logical Volumes.

## Using parallelism to reduce the time for geometry initialisation

The computation work to create the 'smart voxel' structure for logical volumes (which contain daughter volumes) was until recently carried out by the initial thread, before tasks or worker threads are created.

In Geant4 11.3 we introduced the ability to share the work of initialising the creation of the 'smart voxel' structures between tasks or threads.

To control whether this is used, a user can configure the G4GeometryManager by request it:

```cpp
auto geomMgr= G4GeometryManager::GetInstance();
G4bool verbose= true;
geomMgr->RequestParallelOptimisation(true, verbose);
```

Using 'true' for the verbosity ensures that the report of the memory and CPU time consumed by volumes is produced (in the standard output.)

It is now on by default, which will speed up this work if a setup has multiple or many volumes that each contain many daughter volumes.

This feature is most useful for the most complex geometries, when it can reduce initialisation time significantly.
