# 038 Hits

## Hit

A hit is a snapshot of the physical interaction of a track in the sensitive region of a detector. In it you can store information associated with a `G4Step` object. This information can be

-   the position and time of the step,

-   the momentum and energy of the track,

-   the energy deposition of the step,

-   geometrical information,

or any combination of the above.

### `G4VHit`

`G4VHit` is an abstract base class which represents a hit. You must inherit this base class and derive your own concrete hit class(es). The member data of your concrete hit class can be, and should be, your choice.

As with `G4THitsCollection`, authors of subclasses must declare templated `G4Allocator`s for their class. They must also implement *operator new()* and *operator delete()* which use these allocators.

`G4VHit` has two virtual methods, `Draw()` and `Print()`. To draw or print out your concrete hits, these methods should be implemented. How to define the drawing method is described in Polylines, Markers and Text.

### `G4THitsCollection`

`G4VHit` is an abstract class from which you derive your own concrete classes. During the processing of a given event, represented by a `G4Event` object, many objects of the hit class will be produced, collected and associated with the event. Therefore, for each concrete hit class you must also prepare a concrete class derived from `G4VHitsCollection`, an abstract class which represents a vector collection of user defined hits.

`G4THitsCollection` is a template class derived from `G4VHitsCollection`, and the concrete hit collection class of a particular `G4VHit` concrete class can be instantiated from this template class. Each object of a hit collection must have a unique name for each event.

`G4Event` has a `G4HCofThisEvent` class object, that is a container class of collections of hits. Hit collections are stored by their pointers, whose type is that of the base class.

### An example of a concrete hit class

Listing 54 shows an example of a concrete hit class.

```cpp
//============ header file =====================

#ifndef B2TrackerHit_h
#define B2TrackerHit_h 1

#include "G4VHit.hh"
#include "G4THitsCollection.hh"
#include "G4Allocator.hh"
#include "G4ThreeVector.hh"
#include "tls.hh"

namespace B2
{

/// Tracker hit class
///
/// It defines data members to store the trackID, chamberNb, energy deposit,
/// and position of charged particles in a selected volume:
/// - fTrackID, fChamberNB, fEdep, fPos

class TrackerHit : public G4VHit
{
  public:
    TrackerHit();
    TrackerHit(const TrackerHit&) = default;
    ~TrackerHit() override;

    // operators
    TrackerHit& operator=(const TrackerHit&) = default;
    G4bool operator==(const TrackerHit&) const;

    inline void* operator new(size_t);
    inline void  operator delete(void*);

    // methods from base class
    void Draw() override;
    void Print() override;

    // Set methods
    void SetTrackID  (G4int track)      { fTrackID = track; };
    void SetChamberNb(G4int chamb)      { fChamberNb = chamb; };
    void SetEdep     (G4double de)      { fEdep = de; };
    void SetPos      (G4ThreeVector xyz){ fPos = xyz; };

    // Get methods
    G4int GetTrackID() const     { return fTrackID; };
    G4int GetChamberNb() const   { return fChamberNb; };
    G4double GetEdep() const     { return fEdep; };
    G4ThreeVector GetPos() const { return fPos; };

  private:
    G4int         fTrackID = -1;
    G4int         fChamberNb = -1;
    G4double      fEdep = 0.;
    G4ThreeVector fPos;
};

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

typedef G4THitsCollection<TrackerHit> TrackerHitsCollection;

extern G4ThreadLocal G4Allocator<TrackerHit>* TrackerHitAllocator;

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

inline void* TrackerHit::operator new(size_t)
{
  if(!TrackerHitAllocator)
      TrackerHitAllocator = new G4Allocator<TrackerHit>;
  return (void *) TrackerHitAllocator->MallocSingle();
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

inline void TrackerHit::operator delete(void *hit)
{
  TrackerHitAllocator->FreeSingle((TrackerHit*) hit);
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

}

#endif

//============ source file =====================

#include "TrackerHit.hh"

namespace B2
{

G4ThreadLocal G4Allocator<TrackerHit>* TrackerHit::TrackerHitAllocator = 0;

 ... snipped ...
```

`G4Allocator` is a class for fast allocation of objects to the heap through the paging mechanism. For details of `G4Allocator`, refer to General management classes. Use of `G4Allocator` is not mandatory, but it is recommended, especially for users who are not familiar with the C++ memory allocation mechanism or alternative tools of memory allocation. On the other hand, note that `G4Allocator` is to be used **only** for the concrete class that is **not** used as a base class of any other classes. For example, do **not** use the `G4Trajectory` class as a base class for a customized trajectory class, since `G4Trajectory` uses `G4Allocator`.

### `G4THitsMap`

`G4THitsMap` is an alternative to `G4THitsCollection`. `G4THitsMap` does not demand `G4VHit`, but instead any variable which can be mapped with an integer key. Typically the key is a copy number of the volume, and the mapped value could for example be a double, such as the energy deposition in a volume. `G4THitsMap` is convenient for applications which do not need to output event-by-event data but instead just accumulate them. All the `G4VPrimitiveScorer` classes discussed in G4MultiFunctionalDetector and G4VPrimitiveScorer use `G4THitsMap`.

`G4THitsMap` is derived from the `G4VHitsCollection` abstract base class and all objects of this class are also stored in `G4HCofThisEvent` at the end of an event. How to access a `G4THitsMap` object is discussed in the following section (G4MultiFunctionalDetector and G4VPrimitiveScorer).

## Sensitive detector

### `G4VSensitiveDetector`

`G4VSensitiveDetector` is an abstract base class which represents a detector. The principal mandate of a sensitive detector is the construction of hit objects using information from steps along a particle track. The `ProcessHits()` method of `G4VSensitiveDetector` performs this task using `G4Step` objects as input. The second argument of `ProcessHits()` method, i.e. `G4TouchableHistory`, is obsolete and not used. If user needs to define an artificial second geometry, use Parallel Geometries.

`ProcessHits()` method has a return type of `G4bool`. This return value is not used by Geant4 kernel. This return value may be used by the user's use-case where one sensitive detector dispatches `ProcessHits()` to some subsequent (i.e. child) sensitive detectors, and to avoid double-counting, one of these child detector may return true or false.

Your concrete detector class should be instantiated with the unique name of your detector. The name can be associated with one or more global names with \"/\" as a delimiter for categorizing your detectors. For example

```cpp
myEMcal = new MyEMcal("/myDet/myCal/myEMcal");
```

where `myEMcal` is the name of your detector. The detector must be constructed in `G4VUserDetectorConstruction::ConstructSDandField()` method. It must be assigned to one or more `G4LogicalVolume` objects to set the sensitivity of these volumes. Such assignment must be made in the same `G4VUserDetectorConstruction::ConstructSDandField()` method. The pointer should also be registered to `G4SDManager`, as described in G4SDManager.

`G4VSensitiveDetector` has three major virtual methods.

`ProcessHits()`

:   This method is invoked by `G4SteppingManager` when a step is composed in the `G4LogicalVolume` which has the pointer to this sensitive detector. The first argument of this method is a `G4Step` object of the current step. The second argument is a `G4TouchableHistory` object for the `Readout geometry` described in the next section. The second argument is `NULL` if `Readout geometry` is not assigned to this sensitive detector. In this method, one or more `G4VHit` objects should be constructed if the current step is meaningful for your detector.

`Initialize()`

:   This method is invoked at the beginning of each event. The argument of this method is an object of the `G4HCofThisEvent` class. Hit collections, where hits produced in this particular event are stored, can be associated with the `G4HCofThisEvent` object in this method. The hit collections associated with the `G4HCofThisEvent` object during this method can be used for `during the event processing` digitization.

`EndOfEvent()`

:   This method is invoked at the end of each event. The argument of this method is the same object as the previous method. Hit collections occasionally created in your sensitive detector can be associated with the `G4HCofThisEvent` object.

## G4SDManager

`G4SDManager` is the singleton manager class for sensitive detectors.

### `Activation/inactivation of sensitive detectors`

The user interface commands `activate` and `inactivate` are available to control your sensitive detectors. For example:

```cpp
/hits/activate detector_name
/hits/inactivate detector_name
```

where `detector_name` can be the detector name or the category name.

For example, if your EM calorimeter is named

```cpp
/myDet/myCal/myEMcal
/hits/inactivate myCal
```

will inactivate all detectors belonging to the `myCal` category.

### `Access to the hit collections`

Hit collections are accessed for various cases.

-   Digitization

-   Event filtering in `G4VUserStackingAction`

-   \"End of event\" simple analysis

-   Drawing / printing hits

The following is an example of how to access the hit collection of a particular concrete type:

```cpp
G4SDManager* fSDM = G4SDManager::GetSDMpointer();
G4RunManager* fRM = G4RunManager::GetRunManager();
G4int collectionID = fSDM->GetCollectionID("collection_name");
const G4Event* currentEvent = fRM->GetCurrentEvent();
G4HCofThisEvent* HCofEvent = currentEvent->GetHCofThisEvent();
MyHitsCollection* myCollection = (MyHitsCollection*)(HC0fEvent->GetHC(collectionID));
```

## `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` and `G4VPrimitiveScorer`

`G4MultiFunctionalDetector` is a concrete class derived from `G4VSensitiveDetector`. Instead of implementing a user-specific detector class, `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` allows the user to register `G4VPrimitiveScorer` classes to build up the sensitivity. `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` should be instantiated in the users detector construction with its unique name and should be assigned to one or more `G4LogicalVolume`s.

`G4VPrimitiveScorer` is an abstract base class representing a class to be registered to `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` that creates a `G4THitsMap` object of one physics quantity for an event. Geant4 provides many concrete primitive scorer classes listed in Concrete classes of G4VPrimitiveScorer, and the user can also implement his/her own primitive scorers. Each primitive scorer object must be instantiated with a name that must be unique among primitive scorers registered in a `G4MultiFunctionalDetector`. Please note that a primitive scorer object must **not** be shared by more than one `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` object.

As mentioned in Hit, each `G4VPrimitiveScorer` generates one `G4THitsMap` object per event. The name of the map object is the same as the name of the primitive scorer. Each of the concrete primitive scorers listed in Concrete classes of G4VPrimitiveScorer generates a `G4THitsMap<G4double>` that maps a `G4double` value to its key integer number. By default, the key is taken as the copy number of the `G4LogicalVolume` to which `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` is assigned. In case the logical volume is uniquely placed in its mother volume and the mother is replicated, the copy number of its mother volume can be taken by setting the second argument of the `G4VPrimitiveScorer` constructor, \"*depth*\" to 1, i.e. one level up. Furthermore, in case the key must consider more than one copy number of a different geometry hierarchy, the user can derive his/her own primitive scorer from the provided concrete class and implement the `GetIndex(G4Step*)` virtual method to return the unique key.

Listing 55 shows an example of primitive sensitivity class definitions.

```cpp
void RE06DetectorConstruction::SetupDetectors()
{
  G4String filterName, particleName;

  G4SDParticleFilter* gammaFilter =
    new G4SDParticleFilter(filterName="gammaFilter",particleName="gamma");
  G4SDParticleFilter* electronFilter =
    new G4SDParticleFilter(filterName="electronFilter",particleName="e-");
  G4SDParticleFilter* positronFilter =
    new G4SDParticleFilter(filterName="positronFilter",particleName="e+");
  G4SDParticleFilter* epFilter = new G4SDParticleFilter(filterName="epFilter");
  epFilter->add(particleName="e-");
  epFilter->add(particleName="e+");

  for(G4int i=0;i<3;i++)
  {
   for(G4int j=0;j<2;j++)
   {
    // Loop counter j = 0 : absorber
    //                = 1 : gap
    G4String detName = fCalName[i];
    if(j==0)
    { detName += "_abs"; }
    else
    { detName += "_gap"; }
    G4MultiFunctionalDetector* det = new G4MultiFunctionalDetector(detName);

    //  The second argument in each primitive means the "level" of geometrical hierarchy,
    // the copy number of that level is used as the key of the G4THitsMap.
    //  For absorber (j = 0), the copy number of its own physical volume is used.
    //  For gap (j = 1), the copy number of its mother physical volume is used, since there
    // is only one physical volume of gap is placed with respect to its mother.
    G4VPrimitiveScorer* primitive;
    primitive = new G4PSEnergyDeposit("eDep",j);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSNofSecondary("nGamma",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(gammaFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSNofSecondary("nElectron",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(electronFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSNofSecondary("nPositron",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(positronFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSMinKinEAtGeneration("minEkinGamma",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(gammaFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSMinKinEAtGeneration("minEkinElectron",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(electronFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSMinKinEAtGeneration("minEkinPositron",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(positronFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSTrackLength("trackLength",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(epFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);
    primitive = new G4PSNofStep("nStep",j);
    primitive->SetFilter(epFilter);
    det->RegisterPrimitive(primitive);

    G4SDManager::GetSDMpointer()->AddNewDetector(det);
    if(j==0)
    { layerLogical[i]->SetSensitiveDetector(det); }
    else
    { gapLogical[i]->SetSensitiveDetector(det); }
   }
  }
}
```

Each `G4THitsMap` object can be accessed from `G4HCofThisEvent` with a unique collection ID number. This ID number can be obtained from `G4SDManager::GetCollectionID()` with a name of `G4MultiFunctionalDetector` and `G4VPrimitiveScorer` connected with a slush (\"/\"). `G4THitsMap` has a \[\] operator taking the key value as an argument and returning **the pointer** of the value. Please note that the \[\] operator returns **the pointer** of the value. If you get zero from the \[\] operator, it does **not** mean the value is zero, but that the provided key does not exist. The value itself is accessible with an asterisk (\"\*\"). It is advised to check the validity of the returned pointer before accessing the value. `G4THitsMap` also has a += operator in order to accumulate event data into run data. Listing 56 shows the use of `G4THitsMap`.

```cpp
#include "Run.hh"

#include "G4RunManager.hh"
#include "G4Event.hh"

#include "G4SDManager.hh"
#include "G4HCofThisEvent.hh"
#include "G4THitsMap.hh"
#include "G4SystemOfUnits.hh"

namespace B3b
{

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

Run::Run()
{ }

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

Run::~Run()
{ }

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

void Run::RecordEvent(const G4Event* event)
{
  if ( fCollID_cryst < 0 ) {
   fCollID_cryst
     = G4SDManager::GetSDMpointer()->GetCollectionID("crystal/edep");
   //G4cout << " fCollID_cryst: " << fCollID_cryst << G4endl;
  }

  if ( fCollID_patient < 0 ) {
   fCollID_patient
     = G4SDManager::GetSDMpointer()->GetCollectionID("patient/dose");
   //G4cout << " fCollID_patient: " << fCollID_patient << G4endl;
  }

  G4int evtNb = event->GetEventID();

  if (evtNb%fPrintModulo == 0) {
    G4cout << G4endl << "---> end of event: " << evtNb << G4endl;
  }

  //Hits collections
  //
  G4HCofThisEvent* HCE = event->GetHCofThisEvent();
  if(!HCE) return;

  //Energy in crystals : identify 'good events'
  //
  const G4double eThreshold = 500*keV;
  G4int nbOfFired = 0;

  G4THitsMap<G4double>* evtMap =
    static_cast<G4THitsMap<G4double>*>(HCE->GetHC(fCollID_cryst));

  std::map<G4int,G4double*>::iterator itr;
  for (itr = evtMap->GetMap()->begin(); itr != evtMap->GetMap()->end(); itr++) {
    G4double edep = *(itr->second);
    if (edep > eThreshold) nbOfFired++;
    ///G4int copyNb  = (itr->first);
    ///G4cout << G4endl << "  cryst" << copyNb << ": " << edep/keV << " keV ";
  }
  if (nbOfFired == 2) fGoodEvents++;

  //Dose deposit in patient
  //
  G4double dose = 0.;

  evtMap = static_cast<G4THitsMap<G4double>*>(HCE->GetHC(fCollID_patient));

  for (itr = evtMap->GetMap()->begin(); itr != evtMap->GetMap()->end(); itr++) {
    ///G4int copyNb  = (itr->first);
    dose = *(itr->second);
  }
  fSumDose += dose;
  fStatDose += dose;

  G4Run::RecordEvent(event);
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

void Run::Merge(const G4Run* aRun)
{
  const Run* localRun = static_cast<const Run*>(aRun);
  fGoodEvents += localRun->fGoodEvents;
  fSumDose    += localRun->fSumDose;
  fStatDose   += localRun->fStatDose;
  G4Run::Merge(aRun);
}

//....oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo........oooOO0OOooo......

}
```

## Concrete classes of `G4VPrimitiveScorer`

With Geant4 version 8.0, several concrete primitive scorer classes are provided, all of which are derived from the `G4VPrimitiveScorer` abstract base class and which are to be registered to `G4MultiFunctionalDetector`. Each of them contains one `G4THitsMap` object and scores a simple double value for each key.

### Track length scorers

`G4PSTrackLength`

:   The track length is defined as the sum of step lengths of the particles inside the cell. By default, the track weight is not taken into account, but could be used as a multiplier of each step length if the `Weighted()` method of this class object is invoked.

`G4PSPassageTrackLength`

:   The passage track length is the same as the track length in `G4PSTrackLength`, except that only tracks which pass through the volume are taken into account. It means newly-generated or stopped tracks inside the cell are excluded from the calculation. By default, the track weight is not taken into account, but could be used as a multiplier of each step length if the `Weighted()` method of this class object is invoked.

### Deposited energy scorers

`G4PSEnergyDeposit`

:   This scorer stores a sum of particles' energy deposits at each step in the cell. The particle weight is multiplied at each step.

`G4PSDoseDeposit`

:   In some cases, dose is a more convenient way to evaluate the effect of energy deposit in a cell than simple deposited energy. The dose deposit is defined by the sum of energy deposits at each step in a cell divided by the mass of the cell. The mass is calculated from the density and volume of the cell taken from the methods of `G4VSolid` and `G4LogicalVolume`. The particle weight is multiplied at each step.

`G4PSDoseDeposit3D`

:   In the case of replica or nested geometries it is necessary to determine voxel numbers from within the replica hierarchy. For example if the *z-axis* is parameterised and *y* is replica of *x* then the voxel number needs to be calculated accordingly:

    ```cpp
    G4PSDoseDeposit3D(("DoseDeposit", fNoVoxelsZ, fNoVoxelsY, fNoVoxelsX, 0, 2, 1);
    ```

    The last three arguments are optional, however required to determine the depth according to each axis (or replica direction). The class creates instances of G4PSDoseDeposit according to:

    ```cpp
    i * fNj * fNk + j * fNk + k;
    ```

    where *i*, *j* and *k* correspond to the 3 arguments for number of voxels and replica depth in the declaration.

### Current and flux scorers

There are two different definitions of a particle's flow for a given geometry. One is a current and the other is a flux. In our scorers, the current is simply defined as the number of particles (with the particle's weight) at a certain surface or volume, while the flux takes the particle's injection angle to the geometry into account. The current and flux are usually defined at a surface, but volume current and volume flux are also provided.

`G4PSFlatSurfaceCurrent`

:   Flat surface current is a surface based scorer. The present implementation is limited to scoring only at the -Z surface of a `G4Box` solid. The quantity is defined by the number of tracks that reach the surface. The user must choose a direction of the particle to be scored. The choices are fCurrent_In, fCurrent_Out, or fCurrent_InOut, one of which must be entered as the second argument of the constructor. Here, fCurrent_In scores incoming particles to the cell, while fCurrent_Out scores only outgoing particles from the cell. fCurrent_InOut scores both directions. The current is multiplied by particle weight and is normalized for a unit area.

`G4PSSphereSurfaceCurrent`

:   Sphere surface current is a surface based scorer, and similar to the G4PSFlatSurfaceCurrent. The only difference is that the surface is defined at the **inner surface** of a G4Sphere solid.

`G4PSPassageCurrent`

:   Passage current is a volume-based scorer. The current is defined by the number of tracks that pass through the volume. A particle weight is applied at the exit point. A passage current is defined for a volume.

`G4PSFlatSurfaceFlux`

:   Flat surface flux is a surface based flux scorer. The surface flux is defined by the number of tracks that reach the surface. The expression of surface flux is given by the sum of W/cos(t)/A, where W, t and A represent particle weight, injection angle of particle with respect to the surface normal, and area of the surface. The user must enter one of the particle directions, fFlux_In, fFlux_Out, or fFlux_InOut in the constructor. Here, fFlux_In scores incoming particles to the cell, while fFlux_Out scores outgoing particles from the cell. fFlux_InOut scores both directions.

`G4PSCellFlux`

:   Cell flux is a volume based flux scorer. The cell flux is defined by a track length (L) of the particle inside a volume divided by the volume (V) of this cell. The track length is calculated by a sum of the step lengths in the cell. The expression for cell flux is given by the sum of (W\*L)/V, where W is a particle weight, and is multiplied by the track length at each step.

`G4PSPassageCellFlux`

:   Passage cell flux is a volume based scorer similar to `G4PSCellFlux`. The only difference is that tracks which pass through a cell are taken into account. It means generated or stopped tracks inside the volume are excluded from the calculation.

### Other scorers

`G4PSMinKinEAtGeneration`

:   This scorer records the minimum kinetic energy of secondary particles at their production point in the volume in an event. This primitive scorer does not integrate the quantity, but records the minimum quantity.

`G4PSNofSecondary`

:   This class scores the number of secondary particles generated in the volume. The weight of the secondary track is taken into account.

`G4PSNofStep`

:   This class scores the number of steps in the cell. A particle weight is not applied.

`G4PSCellCharge`

:   This class scored the total charge of particles which has stopped in the volume.

## `G4VSDFilter` and its derived classes

`G4VSDFilter` is an abstract class that represents a track filter to be associated with `G4VSensitiveDetector` or `G4VPrimitiveScorer`. It defines a virtual method

```cpp
G4bool Accept(const G4Step*)
```

that should return *true* if this particular step should be scored by the `G4VSensitiveDetector` or `G4VPrimitiveScorer`.

While the user can implement his/her own filter class, Geant4 version 8.0 provides the following concrete filter classes:

G4SDChargedFilter

:   All charged particles are accepted.

G4SDNeutralFilter

:   All neutral particles are accepted.

G4SDParticleFilter

:   Particle species which are registered to this filter object by `Add("particle_name")` are accepted. More than one species can be registered.

G4SDKineticEnergyFilter

:   A track with kinetic energy greater than or equal to EKmin and smaller than EKmin is accepted. EKmin and EKmax should be defined as arguments of the constructor. The default values of EKmin and EKmax are zero and DBL_MAX.

G4SDParticleWithEnergyFilter

:   Combination of `G4SDParticleFilter` and `G4SDParticleWithEnergyFilter`.

The use of the `G4SDParticleFilter` class is demonstrated in Listing 55, where filters which accept gamma, electron, positron and electron/positron are defined.

## Multiple sensitive detectors associated to a single logical-volume

From Geant4 Version 10.3 it is possible to attach multiple sensitive detectors to a single geometrical element. This is achieved via the use of a special proxy class, to which multiple child sensitive detectors are attached: `G4MultiSensitiveDetector`. The kernel still sees a single sensitive detector associated to any given logical-volume, but the proxy will dispatch the calls from kernel to all the attached child sensitive detectors.

When using the `G4VUserDetectorConstruction::SetSensitiveDetector(...)` utility method the handling of multiple sensitive detectors is done automatically. Multiple calls to the method passing the same logical volume will trigger the creation and setup of an instance of `G4MultiSensitiveDetector`.

For more complex use cases it may be necessary to manually instantiate and setup an instance of `G4MultiSensitiveDetector`. For this advanced use case you can refer to the implementation of the `G4VUserDetectorConstruction::SetSensitiveDetector(G4LogicalVolume* logVol, G4VSensitiveDetector* aSD)` utility method.

```cpp
void MyDetectorConstruction::ConstructSDandField()
{
  auto sdman = G4SDManager::GetSDMpointer();
  //...
  auto mySD = new mySD1("/SD1");
  sdman->AddNewDetector(mySD);//Note we explicitly add the SD to the manager
  SetSensitiveDetector("LogVolName",mySD);
  auto mySD2 = new MySD2("/SD2");
  sdman->AddNewDetector(mySD2);
  //This will trigger automatic creation and setup of proxy
  SetSensitiveDetector("LogVolName",mySD2);
  //...
}
```

## Utilities

### UI-command base scoring

Command-based scoring functionality offers the user a possibility to define a scoring-mesh and various scorers for commonly-used physics quantities such as dose, flux, etc. via UI commands.

Due to small performance overhead, it does not come by default. To use this functionality, `G4ScoringManager` has to be activated after the instantiation of G4RunManager in the `main()` function, see Listing 58. This will create the UI commands in /score directory.

```cpp
#include "G4ScoringManager.hh"
int main()
{
 // ...
 G4RunManager* runManager = new G4RunManager;
 G4ScoringManager::GetScoringManager();
 // ...
}
```

An example of a macro creating a scoring mesh of box type with two scorers and a filter is given below:

```cpp
# Define scoring mesh
/score/create/boxMesh boxMesh_1
/score/mesh/boxSize 100. 100. 100. cm
/score/mesh/nBin 30 30 30

# Define scoring quantity
/score/quantity/energyDeposit boxMash keV

# Define a filter
/score/filter/charged

# Close mesh
/score/close
```

Detailed usage of command-based scoring is given in the section Command-based scoring.

`G4ScoringManager` provides also a default score writer which dumps every entry of one quantity of a mesh for all quantities of the mesh one by one in CSV format. To alternate the file format the user can implement his/her own score writer deriving from `G4VUserScoreWriter` base class and set it to `G4ScoringManager`. To demonstrate this, `RE03UserScoreWriter` is included in the extended RE03 example in the runAndEvent category.

### Score Ntuple Writer

It is also possible to save the scorers hits using Geant4 analysis tools. This functionality is assured by the `G4VScoreNtupleWriter` interface (since 10.5) and the `G4TScoreNtupleWriter` and `G4TScoreNtupleWriterMessenger` classses (since 10.6).

This feature is demonstrated in the basic examples B3 and B4d. The example of activating the score ntuple writer is given below:

```cpp
#include "G4AnalysisManager.hh"
#include "G4TScoreNtupleWriter.hh"

  // Activate score ntuple writer
  G4TScoreNtupleWriter<G4AnalysisManager> scoreNtupleWriter;
  scoreNtupleWriter.SetVerboseLevel(1);
```

The Geant4 UI commands defined in `G4TScoreNtupleWriterMessenger` can be used to choose the output file name and the level of verbosity:

```cpp
/score/ntuple/writerFileName name
/score/ntuple/writerVerbose 1
```
