# 039 Digitization

## Digi

A hit is created by a sensitive detector when a step goes through it. Thus, the sensitive detector is associated to the corresponding `G4LogicalVolume` object(s). On the other hand, a digit is created using information of hits and/or other digits by a digitizer module. The digitizer module is not associated with any volume, and you have to implicitly invoke the `Digitize()` method of your concrete `G4VDigitizerModule` class.

Typical usages of digitizer module include:

-   simulate ADC and/or TDC

-   simulate readout scheme

-   generate raw data

-   simulate trigger logics

-   simulate pile up

### `G4VDigi`

`G4VDigi` is an abstract base class which represents a digit. You have to inherit this base class and derive your own concrete digit class(es). The member data of your concrete digit class should be defined by yourself. `G4VDigi` has two virtual methods, `Draw()` and `Print()`.

As with `G4VHit`, authors of subclasses must declare templated `G4Allocator`s for their digit class. They must also implement *operator new()* and *operator delete()* which use these allocators.

### `G4TDigiCollection`

`G4TDigiCollection` is a template class for digits collections, which is derived from the abstract base class `G4VDigiCollection`. `G4Event` has a `G4DCofThisEvent` object, which is a container class of collections of digits. The usages of `G4VDigi` and `G4TDigiCollection` are almost the same as `G4VHit` and `G4THitsCollection`, respectively, explained in the previous section.

As with `G4THitsCollection`, authors of subclasses must declare templated `G4Allocator`s for their collection class. They must also implement *operator new()* and *operator delete()* which use these allocators.

## Digitizer module

### `G4VDigitizerModule`

`G4VDigitizerModule` is an abstract base class which represents a digitizer module. It has a pure virtual method, `Digitize()`. A concrete digitizer module must have an implementation of this virtual method. The Geant4 kernel classes do not have a \"built-in\" invocation to the `Digitize()` method. You have to implement your code to invoke this method of your digitizer module.

In the `Digitize()` method, you construct your `G4VDigi` concrete class objects and store them to your `G4TDigiCollection` concrete class object(s). Your collection(s) should be associated with the `G4DCofThisEvent` object.

### `G4DigiManager`

`G4DigiManager` is the singleton manager class of the digitizer modules. All of your concrete digitizer modules should be registered to `G4DigiManager` with their unique names.

```cpp
G4DigiManager * fDM = G4DigiManager::GetDMpointer();
MyDigitizer * myDM = new MyDigitizer( "/myDet/myCal/myEMdigiMod" );
fDM->AddNewModule(myDM);
```

Your concrete digitizer module can be accessed from your code using the unique module name.

```cpp
G4DigiManager * fDM = G4DigiManager::GetDMpointer();
MyDigitizer * myDM = fDM->FindDigitizerModule( "/myDet/myCal/myEMdigiMod" );
myDM->Digitize();
```

Also, `G4DigiManager` has a `Digitize()` method which takes the unique module name.

```cpp
G4DigiManager * fDM = G4DigiManager::GetDMpointer();
MyDigitizer * myDM = fDM->Digitize( "/myDet/myCal/myEMdigiMod" );
```

### How to get hitsCollection and/or digiCollection

`G4DigiManager` has the following methods to access to the hits or digi collections of the currently processing event or of previous events.

First, you have to get the collection ID number of the hits or digits collection.

```cpp
G4DigiManager * fDM = G4DigiManager::GetDMpointer();
G4int myHitsCollID = fDM->GetHitsCollectionID( "hits_collection_name" );
G4int myDigiCollID = fDM->GetDigiCollectionID( "digi_collection_name" );
```

Then, you can get the pointer to your concrete `G4THitsCollection` object or `G4TDigiCollection` object of the currently processing event.

```cpp
MyHitsCollection * HC = fDM->GetHitsCollection( myHitsCollID );
MyDigiCollection * DC = fDM->GetDigiCollection( myDigiCollID );
```

In case you want to access to the hits or digits collection of previous events, add the second argument.

```cpp
MyHitsCollection * HC = fDM->GetHitsCollection( myHitsCollID, n );
MyDigiCollection * DC = fDM->GetDigiCollection( myDigiCollID, n );
```

where, `n` indicates the hits or digits collection of the `n`^th^ previous event.
