# 042 Parallel Geometries

## A parallel world

Occasionally, it is not straightforward to define geometries for sensitive detectors, importance geometries or envelopes for shower parameterization to be coherently assigned to volumes in the tracking (mass) geometry. The parallel navigation functionality introduced since release 8.2 of Geant4, allows the user to define more than one world simultaneously. The `G4CoupledTransportation` process will see all worlds simultaneously; steps will be limited by every boundaries of the mass and parallel geometries. `G4Transportation` is automatically replaced `G4CoupledTransportation`.

In a parallel world, the user can define volumes in arbitrary manner with sensitivity, regions, shower parameterization setups, and/or importance weight for biasing. Volumes in different worlds may overlap.

Any kind of `G4VSensitiveDetector` object can be defined in volumes in a parallel world, exactly at the same manner for the mass geometry. `G4Step` object given as an argument of `ProcessHit()` method contains geometrical information of the associated world.

Here are restrictions to be considered for the parallel geometry:

-   Production thresholds and EM field are used only from the mass geometry. Even if such *physical* quantities are defined in a parallel world, they do not affect to the simulation.

-   Although all worlds will be comprehensively taken care by the `G4CoupledTransportation` process for the navigation, each parallel world must have its own unique object of `G4ParallelWorldProcess` process (for instance created with `G4ParallelWorldPhysics` constructor registered to a modular physics list).

-   Volumes in a parallel world may have materials. Such materials overwrite the materials defined in the mass geometry if the `"layered mass geometry"` switch of the `G4ParallelWorldProcess` constructor is set.

## Defining a parallel world

A parallel world should be defined in the `Construct()` virtual method of the user's class derived from the abstract base class `G4VUserParallelWorld`. If needed, sensitive detectors must be defined in the `ConstructSD()` method of the same derived class. Please note that EM field cannot be defined in a parallel world.

```cpp
#ifndef MyParallelWorld_h
#define MyParallelWorld_h 1

#include "globals.hh"
#include "G4VUserParallelWorld.hh"

class MyParallelWorld : public G4VUserParallelWorld
{
  public:
    MyParallelWorld(G4String worldName);
    virtual ~MyParallelWorld();

  public:
    virtual void Construct();
    virtual void ConstructSD();
};

#endif
```

A parallel world must have its unique name, which should be set to the `G4VUserParallelWorld` base class as an argument of the base class constructor.

The world physical volume of the parallel world is provided by the `G4RunManager` as a clone of the mass geometry. In the `Construct()` virtual method of the user's class, the pointer to this cloned world physical volume is available through the `GetWorld()` method defined in the base class. The user should fill the volumes in the parallel world by using this provided world volume. For a logical volume in a parallel world, the material pointer can be `nullptr`. Even if specified a valid material pointer, unless `"layered mass geometry"` switch of the `G4ParallelWorldProcess` constructor is set, it will not be taken into account by any physics process.

```cpp
#include "MyParallelWorld.hh"
#include "G4LogicalVolume.hh"
#include "G4VPhysicalVolume.hh"
#include "G4Box.hh"
#include "G4PVPlacement.hh"

MyParallelWorld::MyParallelWorld(G4String worldName)
:G4VUserParallelWorld(worldName)
{;}

MyParallelWorld::~MyParallelWorld()
{;}

void MyParallelWorld::Construct()
{
  G4VPhysicalVolume* ghostWorld = GetWorld();
  G4LogicalVolume* worldLogical = ghostWorld->GetLogicalVolume();

  // place volumes in the parallel world here. For example ...
  //
  G4Box * ghostSolid = new G4Box("GhostdBox", 60.*cm, 60.*cm, 60.*cm);
  G4LogicalVolume * ghostLogical
        = new G4LogicalVolume(ghostSolid, 0, "GhostLogical", 0, 0, 0);
  new G4PVPlacement(0, G4ThreeVector(), ghostLogical,
                    "GhostPhysical", worldLogical, 0, 0);
}
```

In case the user needs to define more than one parallel worlds, each of them must be implemented through its dedicated class. Each parallel world should be registered to the mass geometry class using the method `RegisterParallelWorld()` available through the class `G4VUserDetectorConstruction`. The registration must be done before the mass world is registered to the `G4RunManager`. Each parallel world should also have its own `G4ParallelWorldPhysics` constructor registered to the physics list using the method `RegisterPhysics()` available through the class `G4VModularPhysicsList`.

```cpp
// RunManager construction
//
G4RunManager* runManager = new G4RunManager;

// mass world
//
MyDetectorConstruction* massWorld = new MyDetectorConstruction;

// parallel world
//
G4String paraWorldName = "ParallelWorld";
massWorld->RegisterParallelWorld(new MyParallelWorld(paraWorldName));

// set mass world to run manager
//
runManager->SetUserInitialization(massWorld);

// physics list
//
G4VModularPhysicsList* physicsList = new FTFP_BERT;
physicsList->RegisterPhysics(new G4ParallelWorldPhysics(paraWorldName));
runManager->SetUserInitialization(physicsList);
```

## Layered mass geometry

If `"layered mass geometry"` switch of the `G4ParallelWorldProcess` constructor is set, that parallel world is conceptually layered on top of the mass geometry. If more than one parallel worlds are defined, later-defined world comes on top of others. A track will see the material of the top layer, if it is `nullptr`, then one layer beneath. Thus, user has to make sure volumes in a parallel world should have `nullptr` as their materials except for volumes he/she really wants to overwrite.

```cpp
// RunManager construction
//
G4RunManager* runManager = new G4RunManager;

// mass world
//
MyDetectorConstruction* massWorld = new MyDetectorConstruction;

// parallel world
//
G4String paraWorldName = "ParallelWorld";
massWorld->RegisterParallelWorld(new MyParallelWorld(paraWorldName));

// set mass world to run manager
//
runManager->SetUserInitialization(massWorld);

// physics list
//
G4VModularPhysicsList* physicsList = new FTFP_BERT;
physicsList->RegisterPhysics(new G4ParallelWorldPhysics(paraWorldName,true));
runManager->SetUserInitialization(physicsList);
```

For an information to advanced users, instead of using `G4ParallelWorldPhysics` physics constructor, once can define `G4ParallelWorldProcess` in his/her physics list and assign it only to some selected kind of particle types. In this case, this parallel world will be seen only by these kinds of particles.
