# 044 Tracking

## Basic Concepts

**Philosophy of Tracking**

All Geant4 processes, including the transportation of particles, are treated generically. In spite of the name \"*tracking*\", particles are not *transported* in the tracking category. `G4TrackingManager` is an interface class which brokers transactions between the event, track and tracking categories. An instance of this class handles the message passing between the upper hierarchical object, which is the event manager, and lower hierarchical objects in the tracking category. The event manager is a singleton instance of the `G4EventManager` class.

The tracking manager receives a track from the event manager and takes the actions required to finish tracking it. `G4TrackingManager` aggregates the pointers to `G4SteppingManager,` `G4Trajectory` and `G4UserTrackingAction`. Also there is a \"use\" relation to `G4Track` and `G4Step`.

`G4SteppingManager` plays an essential role in tracking the particle. It takes care of all message passing between objects in the different categories relevant to transporting a particle (for example, geometry and interactions in matter). Its public method `Stepping()` steers the stepping of the particle. The algorithm to handle one step is given below.

1.  If the particle stop (i.e. zero kinetic energy), each active AtRest process proposes a step length in time based on the interaction it describes. And the process proposing the smallest step length will be invoked.

2.  Each active discrete or continuous process must propose a step length based on the interaction it describes. The smallest of these step lengths is taken.

3.  The geometry navigator calculates \"Safety\", the distance to the next volume boundary. If the minimum physical-step-length from the processes is shorter than \"Safety\", the physical-step-length is selected as the next step length. In this case, no further geometrical calculations will be performed.

4.  If the minimum physical-step-length from the processes is longer than \"Safety\", the distance to the next boundary is re-calculated.

5.  The smaller of the minimum physical-step-length and the geometric step length is taken.

6.  All active continuous processes are invoked. Note that the particle's kinetic energy will be updated only after all invoked processes have completed. The change in kinetic energy will be the sum of the contributions from these processes.

7.  The current track properties are updated before discrete processes are invoked. In the same time, the secondary particles created by processes are stored in SecondaryList. The updated properties are:

    -   the kinetic energy of the current track particle (note that 'sumEnergyChange' is the sum of the energy difference before and after each process invocation)

    -   position and time

8.  The kinetic energy of the particle is checked to see whether or not it has been terminated by a continuous process. If the kinetic energy goes down to zero, AtRest processes will be applied at the next step if applicable.

9.  The discrete process is invoked. After the invocation,

    -   the energy, position and time of the current track particle are updated, and

    -   the secondaries are stored in SecondaryList.

10. The track is checked to see whether or not it has been terminated by the discrete process.

11. \"Safety\" is updated.

12. If the step was limited by the volume boundary, push the particle into the next volume.

13. Handle hit information.

14. Invoke the user intervention `G4UserSteppingAction`.

15. Save data to Trajectory.

16. Update the mean free paths of the discrete processes.

17. If the parent particle is still alive, reset the maximum interaction length of the discrete process which has occurred.

18. One step completed.

**What is a Process?**

Only processes can change information of `G4Track` and add secondary tracks via `ParticleChange`. `G4VProcess` is a base class of all processes and it has 3 kinds of `DoIt` and `GetPhysicalInteraction` methods in order to describe interactions generically. If a user want to modify information of `G4Track`, he (or she) SHOULD create a special process for the purpose and register the process to the particle.

**What is a Track?**

`G4Track` keeps 'current' information of the particle. (i.e. energy,momentum, position ,time and so on) and has 'static' information (i.e. mass, charge, life and so on) also. Note that `G4Track` keeps information at the beginning of the step while the `AlongStepDoIt`s are being invoked for the step in progress.After finishing all `AlongStepDoIt`s, `G4Track` is updated. On the other hand, `G4Track` is updated after each invocation of a `PostStepDoIt`.

**What is a Step?**

`G4Step` stores the transient information of a step. This includes the two endpoints of the step, `PreStepPoint` and `PostStepPoint`, which contain the points' coordinates and the volumes containing the points. `G4Step` also stores the change in track properties between the two points. These properties, such as energy and momentum, are updated as the various active processes are invoked.

**What is a ParticleChange?**

Processes do NOT change any information of `G4Track` directly in their `DoIt`. Instead, they proposes changes as a result of interactions by using `ParticleChange`. After each `DoIt`, `ParticleChange` updates `PostStepPoint` based on proposed changes. Then, `G4Track` is updated after finishing all `AlongStepDoIt`s and after each `PostStepDoIt`.

## Access to Track and Step Information

**How to Get Track Information**

Track information may be accessed by invoking various `Get` methods provided in the `G4Track` class. For details, see the G4Track.hh header file in `$G4INCLUDE`. Typical information available includes:

-   (x,y,z)

-   Global time (time since the event was created)

-   Local time (time since the track was created)

-   Proper time (time in its rest frame since the track was created )

-   Momentum direction ( unit vector )

-   Kinetic energy

-   Accumulated geometrical track length

-   Accumulated true track length

-   Pointer to dynamic particle

-   Pointer to physical volume

-   Track ID number

-   Track ID number of the parent

-   Current step number

-   Track status

-   (x,y,z) at the start point (vertex position) of the track

-   Momentum direction at the start point (vertex position) of the track

-   Kinetic energy at the start point (vertex position) of the track

-   Pointer to the process which created the current track

**How to Get Step Information**

Step and step-point information can be retrieved by invoking various `Get` methods provided in the `G4Step`/`G4StepPoint` classes..

Information in G4Step includes:

-   Pointers to `PreStep` and `PostStepPoint`

-   Geometrical step length (step length before the correction of multiple scattering)

-   True step length (step length after the correction of multiple scattering)

-   Increment of position and time between `PreStepPoint` and `PostStepPoint`

-   Increment of momentum and energy between `PreStepPoint` and `PostStepPoint`. (Note: to get the energy deposited in the step, you cannot use this 'Delta energy'. You have to use 'Total energy deposit' as below.)

-   Pointer to `G4Track`

-   Total energy deposited during the step - this is the sum of

    -   the energy deposited by the energy loss process, and

    -   the energy lost by secondaries which have NOT been generated because each of their energies was below the cut threshold

-   Energy deposited not by ionization during the step

-   Secondary tracks created during tracking for the current track.

    -   NOTE: all secondaries are included. NOT only secondaries created in the CURRENT step.

Information in G4StepPoint (`PreStepPoint` and `PostStepPoint`) includes:

-   (x, y, z, t)

-   (px, py, pz, Ek)

-   Momentum direction (unit vector)

-   Pointers to physical volumes

-   Safety

-   Beta, gamma

-   Polarization

-   Step status

-   Pointer to the physics process which defined the current step and its `DoIt` type

-   Pointer to the physics process which defined the previous step and its `DoIt` type

-   Total track length

-   Global time (time since the current event began)

-   Local time (time since the current track began)

-   Proper time

**How to Get \"particle change\"**

Particle change information can be accessed by invoking various `Get` methods provided in the G4ParticleChange class. Typical information available includes:

-   final momentum direction of the parent particle

-   final kinetic energy of the parent particle

-   final position of the parent particle

-   final global time of the parent particle

-   final proper time of the parent particle

-   final polarization of the parent particle

-   status of the parent particle (`G4TrackStatus`)

-   true step length (this is used by multiple scattering to store the result of the transformation from the geometrical step length to the true step length)

-   local energy deposited - this consists of either

    -   energy deposited by the energy loss process, or

    -   the energy lost by secondaries which have NOT been generated because each of their energies was below the cut threshold.

-   number of secondaries particles

-   list of secondary particles (list of `G4Track`)

## Handling of Secondary Particles

Secondary particles are passed as `G4Track`s from a physics process to tracking. `G4ParticleChange` provides the following four methods for a physics process:

-   `AddSecondary( G4Track* aSecondary )`

-   `AddSecondary( G4DynamicParticle* aSecondary )`

-   `AddSecondary( G4DynamicParticle* aSecondary, G4ThreeVector position )`

-   `AddSecondary( G4DynamicParticle* aSecondary, G4double time)`

In all but the first, the construction of `G4Track` is done in the methods using information given by the arguments.

## User Actions

There are two classes which allow the user to intervene in the tracking. These are:

-   `G4UserTrackingAction`, and

-   `G4UserSteppingAction`.

Each provides methods which allow the user access to the Geant4 kernel at specific points in the tracking.

Note

Users SHOULD NOT (and CAN NOT) change `G4Track` in `UserSteppingAction`. The only exception is the `TrackStatus`.

Note

Users have to be cautious to implement an unnatural/unphysical action in these user actions. See the section Killing Tracks in User Actions and Energy Conservation for more details.

## Verbose Outputs

The verbose information output flag can be turned on or off. The amount of information printed about the track/step, from brief to very detailed, can be controlled by the value of the verbose flag, for example,

```text
G4UImanager* UI = G4UImanager::GetUIpointer();

UI->ApplyCommand("/tracking/verbose 1");
```

## Trajectory and Trajectory Point

### G4Trajectory and G4TrajectoryPoint

`G4Trajectory` and `G4TrajectoryPoint` are default concrete classes provided by Geant4, which are derived from the `G4VTrajectory` and `G4VTrajectoryPoint` base classes, respectively. A `G4Trajectory` class object is created by `G4TrackingManager` when a `G4Track` is passed from the `G4EventManager`. `G4Trajectory` has the following data members:

-   ID numbers of the track and the track's parent

-   particle name, charge, and PDG code

-   a collection of `G4TrajectoryPoint` pointers

`G4TrajectoryPoint` corresponds to a step point along the path followed by the track. Its position is given by a `G4ThreeVector`. A `G4TrajectoryPoint` class object is created in the `AppendStep()` method of `G4Trajectory` and this method is invoked by `G4TrackingManager` at the end of each step. The first point is created when the `G4Trajectory` is created, thus the first point is the original vertex.

The creation of a trajectory can be controlled by invoking `G4TrackingManager::SetStoreTrajectory(G4bool)`. The UI command */tracking/storeTrajectory \_bool\_* does the same. The user can set this flag for each individual track from his/her `G4UserTrackingAction::PreUserTrackingAction()` method.

Note

The user should not create trajectories for secondaries in a shower due to the large amount of memory consumed.

All the created trajectories in an event are stored in `G4TrajectoryContainer` class object and this object will be kept by `G4Event`. To draw or print trajectories generated in an event, the user may invoke the `DrawTrajectory()` or `ShowTrajectory()` methods of `G4VTrajectory`, respectively, from his/her `G4UserEventAction::EndOfEventAction()`. The geometry must be drawn before the trajectory drawing. The color of the drawn trajectory depends on the particle charge:

-   negative: red

-   neutral: green

-   positive: blue

Note

Due to improvements in `G4Navigator`, a track can execute more than one turn of its spiral trajectory without being broken into smaller steps as long as the trajectory does not cross a geometrical boundary. Thus a drawn trajectory may not be circular.

### Customizing trajectory and trajectory point

`G4Track` and `G4Step` are transient classes; they are not available at the end of the event. Thus, the concrete classes `G4VTrajectory` and `G4VTrajectoryPoint` are the only ones a user may employ for end-of-event analysis or for persistency. As mentioned above, the default classes which Geant4 provides, i.e. `G4Trajectory` and `G4TrajectoryPoint`, have only very primitive quantities. The user can customize his/her own trajectory and trajectory point classes by deriving directly from the respective base classes.

To use the customized trajectory, the user must construct a concrete trajectory class object in the `G4UserTrackingAction::PreUserTrackingAction()` method and make its pointer available to `G4TrackingManager` by using the `SetTrajectory()` method. The customized trajectory point class object must be constructed in the `AppendStep()` method of the user's implementation of the trajectory class. This `AppendStep()` method will be invoked by `G4TrackingManager`.

To customize trajectory drawing, the user can override the `DrawTrajectory()` method in his/her own trajectory class.

When a customized version of G4Trajectory declares any new class variables, *operator new* and *operator delete* must be provided. It is also useful to check that the allocation size in *operator new* is equal to `sizeof(G4Trajectory)`. These two points do not apply to `G4VTrajectory` because it has no *operator new* or *operator delete*.
