# 055 Optional User Actions

There are five virtual classes whose methods the user may override in order to gain control of the simulation at various stages. Each method of each action class has an empty default implementation, allowing the user to inherit and implement desired classes and methods.

Objects of user action classes must be registered with `G4RunManager` (Manage the run procedures), which takes ownership of them. The user must not delete these objects directly, and they must be created using 'new'.

## Usage of User Actions

### `G4UserRunAction`

This class has three virtual methods which are invoked by `G4RunManager` for each run:

-

    `GenerateRun()`

    :   This method is invoked at the beginning of `BeamOn`. Because the user can inherit the class `G4Run` and create his/her own concrete class to store some information about the run, the `GenerateRun()` method is the place to instantiate such an object. It is also the ideal place to set variables which affect the physics table (such as production thresholds) for a particular run, because `GenerateRun()` is invoked before the calculation of the physics table.

-

    `BeginOfRunAction()`

    :   This method is invoked before entering the event loop. A typical use of this method would be to initialize and/or book histograms for a particular run. This method is invoked after the calculation of the physics tables.

-

    `EndOfRunAction()`

    :   This method is invoked at the very end of the run processing. It is typically used for a simple analysis of the processed run.

```cpp
class G4UserRunAction
{
  public:
    G4UserRunAction();
    virtual ~G4UserRunAction();

  public:
    virtual G4Run* GenerateRun();
    virtual void BeginOfRunAction(const G4Run*);
    virtual void EndOfRunAction(const G4Run*);
};
```

### `G4UserEventAction`

This class has two virtual methods which are invoked by `G4EventManager` for each event:

-

    `beginOfEventAction()`

    :   This method is invoked before converting the primary particles to `G4Track` objects. A typical use of this method would be to initialize and/or book histograms for a particular event.

-

    `endOfEventAction()`

    :   This method is invoked at the very end of event processing. It is typically used for a simple analysis of the processed event. If the user wants to keep the currently processing event until the end of the current run, the user can invoke `fpEventManager->KeepTheCurrentEvent();` so that it is kept in `G4Run` object. This should be quite useful if you simulate quite many events and want to visualize only the most interest ones after the long execution. Given the memory size of an event and its contents may be large, it is the user's responsibility not to keep unnecessary events.

```cpp
class G4UserEventAction
{
  public:
      G4UserEventAction() {;}
      virtual ~G4UserEventAction() {;}
      virtual void BeginOfEventAction(const G4Event*);
      virtual void EndOfEventAction(const G4Event*);
  protected:
      G4EventManager* fpEventManager;
};
```

### `G4UserStackingAction`

This class has three virtual methods, `ClassifyNewTrack`, `NewStage` and `PrepareNewEvent` which the user may override in order to control the various track stacking mechanisms. ExampleN04 could be a good example to understand the usage of this class.

`ClassifyNewTrack()` is invoked by `G4StackManager` whenever a new `G4Track` object is \"pushed\" onto a stack by `G4EventManager`. `ClassifyNewTrack()` returns an enumerator, `G4ClassificationOfNewTrack`, whose value indicates to which stack, if any, the track will be sent. This value should be determined by the user. `G4ClassificationOfNewTrack` has four possible values:

-   `fUrgent` - track is placed in the *urgent* stack

-   `fWaiting` - track is placed in the *waiting* stack, and will not be simulated until the *urgent* stack is empty

-   `fPostpone` - track is postponed to the next event

-   `fKill` - the track is deleted immediately and not stored in any stack.

These assignments may be made based on the origin of the track which is obtained as follows:

```cpp
G4int parent_ID = aTrack->get_parentID();
```

where

-   `parent_ID = 0` indicates a primary particle

-   `parent_ID > 0` indicates a secondary particle

-   `parent_ID < 0` indicates postponed particle from previous event.

`NewStage()` is invoked when the *urgent* stack is empty and the *waiting* stack contains at least one `G4Track` object. Here the user may kill or re-assign to different stacks all the tracks in the *waiting* stack by calling the `stackManager->ReClassify()` method which, in turn, calls the `ClassifyNewTrack()` method. If no user action is taken, all tracks in the *waiting* stack are transferred to the *urgent* stack. The user may also decide to abort the current event even though some tracks may remain in the *waiting* stack by calling `stackManager->clear()`. This method is valid and safe only if it is called from the `G4UserStackingAction` class. A global method of event abortion is

```cpp
G4UImanager * UImanager = G4UImanager::GetUIpointer();
UImanager->ApplyCommand("/event/abort");
```

`PrepareNewEvent()` is invoked at the beginning of each event. At this point no primary particles have been converted to tracks, so the *urgent* and *waiting* stacks are empty. However, there may be tracks in the *postponed-to-next-event* stack; for each of these the `ClassifyNewTrack()` method is called and the track is assigned to the appropriate stack.

```cpp
#include "G4ClassificationOfNewTrack.hh"

class G4UserStackingAction
{
  public:
      G4UserStackingAction();
      virtual ~G4UserStackingAction();
  protected:
      G4StackManager * stackManager;

  public:
//---------------------------------------------------------------
// virtual methods to be implemented by user
//---------------------------------------------------------------
//
      virtual G4ClassificationOfNewTrack ClassifyNewTrack(const G4Track*);
      virtual void NewStage();
      virtual void PrepareNewEvent();
};
```

### `G4UserTrackingAction`

```cpp
//---------------------------------------------------------------
// G4UserTrackingAction.hh
//
// Description:
// This class represents actions taken place by the user at
// the start/end point of processing one track.
//---------------------------------------------------------------

class G4UserTrackingAction
{
   public:

     // Constructor & Destructor
     G4UserTrackingAction(){};
     virtual ~G4UserTrackingAction(){}

     // Member functions
     virtual void PreUserTrackingAction(const G4Track*){}
     virtual void PostUserTrackingAction(const G4Track*){}

   protected:

     G4TrackingManager* fpTrackingManager;
};
```

### `G4UserSteppingAction`

```cpp
//---------------------------------------------------------------
//  G4UserSteppingAction.hh
//
//  Description:
//    This class represents actions taken place by the user at each
//    end of stepping.
//---------------------------------------------------------------

class G4UserSteppingAction
{
   public:

     // Constructor and destructor
     G4UserSteppingAction(){}
     virtual ~G4UserSteppingAction(){}

     // Member functions
     virtual void UserSteppingAction(const G4Step*){}

   protected:

     G4SteppingManager* fpSteppingManager;

};
```

## Killing Tracks in User Actions and Energy Conservation

In either of user action classes described in the previous section, the user can implement an unnatural/unphysical action. A typical example is to kill a track, which is under the simulation, in the user stepping action. In this case the user have to be cautious of the total energy conservation. The user stepping action itself does not take care the energy or any physics quantity associated with the killed track. Therefore if the user want to keep the total energy of an event in this case, the lost track energy need to be recorded by the user.

The same is true for user stacking or tracking actions. If the user has killed a track in these actions the all physics information associated with it would be lost and, for example, the total energy conservation be broken.

If the user wants the Geant4 kernel to take care the total energy conservation automatically when he/she has killed artificially a track, the user has to use a killer process. For example if the user uses G4UserLimits and G4UserSpecialCuts process, energy of the killed track is added to the total energy deposit.
