# 065 Visualization Attributes

Visualization attributes are extra pieces of information associated with the visualizable objects. This information is necessary only for visualization, and is not included in geometrical information such as shapes, position, and orientation. Typical examples of visualization attributes are Color, Visible/Invisible, Wireframe/Solid. For example, in visualizing a box, the Visualization Manager must know its colour. If an object to be visualized has not been assigned a set of visualization attributes, then an appropriate default set is used automatically.

A set of visualization attributes is held by an instance of class `G4VisAttributes` defined in the `graphics_reps` category. In the following, we explain the main fields of the `G4VisAttributes` one by one.

## Visibility

Visibility is a Boolean flag to control the visibility of objects that are passed to the Visualization Manager for visualization. Visibility is set with the following access function:

```cpp
void G4VisAttributes::SetVisibility (G4bool visibility);
```

If you give `false` to the argument, and if culling is activated (see below), visualization is skipped for objects for which this set of visualization attributes is assigned. The default value of visibility is `true`.

Note that whether an object is visible or not is also affected by the current culling policy, which can be tuned with visualization commands.

By default the following public static function is defined:

```cpp
static const G4VisAttributes& GetInvisible();
```

which returns a reference to a const object in which visibility is set to `false`. It can be used as follows:

```cpp
experimentalHall_logical -> SetVisAttributes (G4VisAttributes::GetInvisible());
```

Direct access to the public static const data member `G4VisAttributes::Invisible` is also possible but deprecated on account of initialisation issues with dynamic libraries.

## Colour

### Construction

Class `G4Colour` (an equivalent class name, `G4Color`, is also available) has 4 fields, which represent the RGBA (red, green, blue, and alpha) components of colour. Each component takes a value between 0 and 1. If an irrelevant value, i.e., a value less than 0 or greater than 1, is given as an argument of the constructor, such a value is automatically clipped to 0 or 1. Alpha is opacity. Its default value `1` means \"opaque\".

A `G4Colour` object is instantiated by giving red, green, and blue components to its constructor, i.e.,

```cpp
G4Colour::G4Colour ( G4double r = 1.0,
                     G4double g = 1.0,
                     G4double b = 1.0,
                     G4double a = 1.0);
                             // 0<=red, green, blue <= 1.0
```

The default value of each component is 1.0. That is to say, the default colour is \"white\" (opaque).

For example, colours which are often used can be instantiated as follows:

```cpp
G4Colour  white   ()              ;  // white
G4Colour  white   (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) ;  // white
G4Colour  gray    (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) ;  // gray
G4Colour  black   (0.0, 0.0, 0.0) ;  // black
G4Colour  red     (1.0, 0.0, 0.0) ;  // red
G4Colour  green   (0.0, 1.0, 0.0) ;  // green
G4Colour  blue    (0.0, 0.0, 1.0) ;  // blue
G4Colour  cyan    (0.0, 1.0, 1.0) ;  // cyan
G4Colour  magenta (1.0, 0.0, 1.0) ;  // magenta
G4Colour  yellow  (1.0, 1.0, 0.0) ;  // yellow
```

It is also possible to instantiate common colours through static public data member functions:

```cpp
static const G4Colour& White   ();
static const G4Colour& Gray    ();
static const G4Colour& Grey    ();
static const G4Colour& Black   ();
static const G4Colour& Red     ();
static const G4Colour& Green   ();
static const G4Colour& Blue    ();
static const G4Colour& Cyan    ();
static const G4Colour& Magenta ();
static const G4Colour& Yellow  ();
```

For example, a local `G4Colour` could be constructed as:

```cpp
G4Colour myRed(G4Colour::Red());
```

After instantiation of a `G4Colour` object, you can access to its components with the following access functions:

```cpp
G4double G4Colour::GetRed   () const ; // Get the red   component.
G4double G4Colour::GetGreen () const ; // Get the green component.
G4double G4Colour::GetBlue  () const ; // Get the blue  component.
```

### Colour Map

`G4Colour` also provides a static colour map, giving access to predefined `G4Colour`'s through a `G4String` key. The default mapping is:

```cpp
G4String           G4Colour
---------------------------------------
white              G4Colour::White   ()
gray               G4Colour::Gray    ()
grey               G4Colour::Grey    ()
black              G4Colour::Black   ()
red                G4Colour::Red     ()
green              G4Colour::Green   ()
blue               G4Colour::Blue    ()
cyan               G4Colour::Cyan    ()
magenta            G4Colour::Magenta ()
yellow             G4Colour::Yellow  ()
```

Colours can be retrieved through the GetColour method:

```cpp
bool G4Colour::GetColour(const G4String& key, G4Colour& result)
```

For example:

```cpp
G4Colour myColour(G4Colour::Black());
if (G4Colour::GetColour("red", myColour)) {
  // Successfully retrieved colour "red". myColour is now red
}
else {
  // Colour did not exist in map. myColour is still black
}
```

To see a list of available named colours, `/vis/list`. These names may also be used to specify colours in many `/vis` commands.

If the key is not registered in the colour map, a warning message is printed and the input colour is not changed. The colour map is case insensitive.

It is also possible to load user defined `G4Colour`'s into the map through the public AddToMap method. For example:

```cpp
G4Colour myColour(0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 1);
G4Colour::AddToMap("custom", myColour);
```

This loads a user defined `G4Colour` with key \"custom\" into the colour map.

It is also possible to use the colours in g4tools:

```cpp
#include "tools/colors"
...
G4Colour niceColour = tools::get_color_aquamarine<G4Colour>();
```

### Colour and G4VisAttributes

Class `G4VisAttributes` holds its colour entry as an object of class `G4Colour`. A `G4Colour` object is passed to a `G4VisAttributes` object with the following access functions:

```cpp
//----- Set functions of G4VisAttributes.
void G4VisAttributes::SetColour (const G4Colour& colour);
void G4VisAttributes::SetColor (const G4Color& color );
```

We can also set RGBA components directly:

```cpp
//----- Set functions of G4VisAttributes
void G4VisAttributes::SetColour ( G4double red   ,
                                  G4double green ,
                                  G4double blue  ,
                                  G4double alpha = 1.0);

void G4VisAttributes::SetColor  ( G4double red   ,
                                  G4double green ,
                                  G4double blue  ,
                                  G4double alpha = 1.);
```

The following constructor with `G4Colour` as its argument is also supported:

```cpp
//----- Constructor of G4VisAttributes
G4VisAttributes::G4VisAttributes (const G4Colour& colour);
```

Note that colour assigned to a `G4VisAttributes` object is not always the colour that ultimately appears in the visualization. The ultimate appearance may be affected by shading and lighting models applied in the selected visualization driver or stand-alone graphics system.

## Forcing attributes

As you will see later, you can select a \"drawing style\" from various options. For example, you can select your detector components to be visualized in \"wireframe\" or with \"surfaces\". In the former, only the edges of your detector are drawn and so the detector looks transparent. In the latter, your detector looks opaque with shading effects.

The forced wireframe and forced solid styles make it possible to mix the wireframe and surface visualization (if your selected graphics system supports such visualization). For example, you can make only the outer wall of your detector \"wired\" (transparent) and can see inside in detail.

Forced wireframe style is set with the following access function:

```cpp
void G4VisAttributes::SetForceWireframe (G4bool force);
```

If you give `true` as the argument, objects for which this set of visualization attributes is assigned are always visualized in wireframe even if in general, the surface drawing style has been requested. The default value of the forced wireframe style is `false`.

Similarly, forced solid style, i.e., to force that objects are always visualized with surfaces, is set with:

```cpp
void G4VisAttributes::SetForceSolid (G4bool force);
```

The default value of the forced solid style is `false`, too.

You can also force auxiliary edges to be visible. Normally they are not visible unless you set the appropriate view parameter. Forcing the auxiliary edges to be visible means that auxiliary edges will be seen whatever the view parameters.

Auxiliary edges are not genuine edges of the volume. They may be in a curved surface made out of polygons, for example, or in plane surface of complicated shape that has to be broken down into simpler polygons. HepPolyhedron breaks all surfaces into triangles or quadrilaterals. There will be auxiliary edges for any volumes with a curved surface, such as a tube or a sphere, or a volume resulting from a Boolean operation. Normally, they are not shown, but sometimes it is useful to see them. In particular, a sphere, because it has no edges, will not be seen in wireframe mode in some graphics systems unless requested by the view parameters or forced, as described here.

To force auxiliary edges to be visible, use:

```cpp
void G4VisAttributes::SetForceAuxEdgeVisible (G4bool force);
```

The default value of the force auxiliary edges visible flag is `false`.

For volumes with edges that are parts of a circle, such as a tube (G4Tubs), etc., it is possible to force the precision of polyhedral representation for visualisation. This is recommended for volumes containing only a small angle of circle, for example, a thin tube segment.

For visualisation, a circle is represented by an N-sided polygon. The default is 24 sides or segments. The user may change this for all volumes in a particular viewer at run time with /vis/viewer/set/lineSegmentsPerCircle; alternatively it can be forced for a particular volume with:

```cpp
void G4VisAttributes::SetForceLineSegmentsPerCircle (G4int nSegments);
```

## Other attributes

Here is a list of Set methods for class `G4VisAttributes`:

```cpp
void SetVisibility          (G4bool);
void SetDaughtersInvisible  (G4bool);
void SetColour              (const G4Colour&);
void SetColor               (const G4Color&);
void SetColour              (G4double red, G4double green, G4double blue,
                             G4double alpha = 1.);
void SetColor               (G4double red, G4double green, G4double blue,
                             G4double alpha = 1.);
void SetLineStyle           (LineStyle);
void SetLineWidth           (G4double);
void SetForceWireframe      (G4bool);
void SetForceSolid          (G4bool);
void SetForceAuxEdgeVisible (G4bool);
void SetForceLineSegmentsPerCircle (G4int nSegments);
// Allows choice of circle approximation.  A circle of 360 degrees
// will be composed of nSegments line segments.  If your solid has
// curves of D degrees that you need to divide into N segments,
// specify nSegments = N * 360 / D.
void SetStartTime           (G4double);
void SetEndTime             (G4double);
void SetAttValues           (const std::vector<G4AttValue>*);
void SetAttDefs             (const std::map<G4String,G4AttDef>*);
```

## Constructors of G4VisAttributes

The following constructors are supported for class `G4VisAttributes`:

```cpp
//----- Constructors of class G4VisAttributes
G4VisAttributes (void);
G4VisAttributes (G4bool visibility);
G4VisAttributes (const G4Colour& colour);
G4VisAttributes (G4bool visibility, const G4Colour& colour);
```

## How to assign G4VisAttributes to a logical volume

In constructing your detector components, you may assign a set of visualization attributes to each \"logical volume\" in order to visualize them later (if you do not do this, the graphics system will use a default set). You cannot make a solid such as `G4Box` hold a set of visualization attributes; this is because a solid should hold only geometrical information. At present, you cannot make a physical volume hold one, but there are plans to design a memory-efficient way to do it; however, you can visualize a transient piece of solid or physical volume with a temporary assigned set of visualization attributes.

Class `G4LogicalVolume` holds a pointer of `G4VisAttributes.` This field is set and referenced with the following access functions:

```cpp
//----- Set functions of G4VisAttributes
void G4VisAttributes::SetVisAttributes (const G4VisAttributes* pVA);
void G4VisAttributes::SetVisAttributes (const G4VisAttributes& VA);

//----- Get functions of G4VisAttributes
const G4VisAttributes* G4VisAttributes::GetVisAttributes () const;
```

The following is sample C++ source codes for assigning a set of visualization attributes with cyan colour and forced wireframe style to a logical volume:

```cpp
//----- C++ source codes: Assigning G4VisAttributes to a logical volume
...
     // Instantiation of a logical volume
myTargetLog = new G4LogicalVolume( myTargetTube,BGO, "TLog", 0, 0, 0);
...
     // Instantiation of a set of visualization attributes with cyan colour
G4VisAttributes * calTubeVisAtt = new G4VisAttributes(G4Colour(0.,1.,1.));
     // Set the forced wireframe style
calTubeVisAtt->SetForceWireframe(true);
     // Assignment of the visualization attributes to the logical volume
myTargetLog->SetVisAttributes(calTubeVisAtt);
```

Note that the life of the visualization attributes must be at least as long as the objects to which they are assigned; it is the users' responsibility to ensure this, and to delete the visualization attributes when they are no longer needed (or just leave them to die at the end of the job).

## Additional User-Defined Attributes

Geant4 Trajectories and Hits can be assigned additional arbitrary attributes:

-   they can be displayed when you click on the relevant object in the FRED or HepRApp browsers. For example, HepRApp then lets you pick objects and see their attributes or select visibility based on these attributes.

-   they can be used for filtering of trajectories, hits and digis (see Trajectory Filtering).

Define the attributes with lines such as:

```cpp
std::map<G4String,G4AttDef>* store = G4AttDefStore::GetInstance("G4Trajectory",isNew);
G4String PN("PN");
(*store)[PN] = G4AttDef(PN,"Particle Name","Physics","","G4String");
G4String IMom("IMom");
(*store)[IMom] = G4AttDef(IMom, "Momentum of track at start of trajectory", "Physics", "",
                                "G4ThreeVector");
```

Then fill the attributes with lines such as:

```cpp
std::vector<G4AttValue>* values = new std::vector<G4AttValue>;
values->push_back(G4AttValue("PN",ParticleName,""));
s.seekp(std::ios::beg);
s << G4BestUnit(initialMomentum,"Energy") << std::ends;
values->push_back(G4AttValue("IMom",c,""));
```

See geant4/source/tracking/src/G4Trajectory.cc for a good example.

`G4AttValue` objects are light, containing just the value; for the long description and other sharable information the `G4AttValue` object refers to a `G4AttDef` object. They are based on the HepRep standard described at http://www.slac.stanford.edu/\~perl/heprep/. Geant4 also provides a way of checking the results; at the point where all the data members have been set (perhaps in your sensitive detector), for example for `hit`:

```cpp
G4cout << G4AttCheck(hit->CreateAttValues(),hit->GetAttDefs()) << G4endl;
```

Geant4 provides some default examples of the use of this facility in the trajectory classes in /source/tracking such as `G4Trajectory`, `G4SmoothTrajectory`. `G4Trajectory::CreateAttValues` shows how `G4AttValue` objects can be made and `G4Trajectory::GetAttDefs` shows how to make the corresponding `G4AttDef` objects and use the `G4AttDefStore`. Note that the \"user\" of CreateAttValues guarantees to destroy them; this is a way of allowing creation on demand and leaving the `G4Trajectory` object, for example, free of such objects in memory. The comments in `G4VTrajectory.hh` explain further and additional insights might be obtained by looking at two methods which use them, namely `G4VTrajectory::DrawTrajectory` and `G4VTrajectory::ShowTrajectory`.

Hits classes in examples /extended/analysis/A01 and /extended/runAndEvent/RE01 show how to do the same for your hits. The base class no-action methods CreateAttValues and GetAttDefs should be overridden in your concrete class. The comments in `G4VHit.hh` explain further.

In addition, the user is free to add a `G4std::vector<G4AttValue>*` and a `G4std::vector<G4AttDef>*` to a `G4VisAttributes` object as could, for example, be used by a `G4LogicalVolume` object.

At the time of writing, only the HepRep graphics systems are capable of displaying the G4AttValue information, but this information will become useful for all Geant4 visualization systems through improvements in release 8.1 or later.
